---
layout: post
author: z64
title: Beginning OOP with Ruby
date: 2017-07-29
---

This post attempts to guide a beginner through object-oriented progamming in Ruby, showing them the thought process behind both designing and interacting with a library, and problem solving in general with Ruby.

To accomplish this, we will be solving a simple geometry problem:

- Describe a collection of objects that can calculate the perimeter of a polygon with an arbitrary number of sides.

## Breaking it down

The first thing we want to do to tackle this problem is to break apart the problem into a series of smaller, bite sized questions. "Good Ruby code" will read a lot like English - I think you'll find the syntax we end up writing will almost look like English answers to these questions. You probably already know the answers to these (which is why I picked this as an example), but read them and pay attention to the language that I use.

**1) What is perimeter?**

> Perimeter is the total distance around an object, in our case a 2D polygon with any number of sides.

**2) What is a Polygon?**

> A **polygon** is an object **made up of lines**.

**3) Okay, so what is a line?**

> A line is the shortest distance between **two points** in space.
Since we're dealing with finite lines, they have a *start* and an *end*.

**4) Okay, so what is a point?**

> A point is a location in space. For our purposes, this location is on a 2D plane, bound by **coordinates**.

In the next section, we'll convert these concepts into Ruby code. Please re-read this section once we're done and see how what we said here is directly represented in the answer we come up with.

## Concepts into code

From the previous section, you can see that we will need three objects to describe our problem. Using the `class` keyword, we can form a basic layout:

```ruby
# A location in 2D space.
class Point
end

# A finite segment (or distance) between two points.
class Line
end

# A collection of lines that describe a 2D shape.
class Polygon
end
```
And from here, we can already describe how we're going to solve our problem, by creating a `#new` instance of a `Polygon`, and calling `#perimeter` on it:
```ruby
Polygon.new(___).perimeter
```
> In Ruby, and in most OOP languages, a `class` describes a "template" for an object. An object is usually a collection of data, and a set of methods or functions that allow you to interact with that data or give it logic. We first describe the objects with a `class`, and create new instances of them with `Thing.new`.

In the next sections, we'll work with one approach to solve this from the ground up, to figure out how to *make* a `Polygon` to get what we need, and explore some properties of Ruby along the way.

## Objects

### Point

Consider any kind of object around you. A pen, a car, your computer - they all have properties, or *attributes*.  Ruby objects can be given *attributes* that let you describe and store data inside them. We do this with the `@var` syntax, like so, describing what defines a `Point` in 2D space:

```ruby
# A location in 2D space.
class Point
  def initialize(x, y)
    @x = x
    @y = y
  end
end
```
> `def` defines a new method, or an instruction on how to do something with an object. `initialize` is a special method that is called whenever you call `#new` on an object to make a new instance of one.

We can now make a new `Point` like so:
```ruby
point = Point.new(1.5, -3.0)
puts point.inspect #=> #<Point:0x2ae37f0 @x=1.5, @y=-3.0>
```

We're going to need to use these attributes of a point in order to do our calculations. To do so, we can define methods that will return the values of our attributes:

```ruby
# A location in 2D space.
class Point
  def initialize(x, y)
    @x = x
    @y = y
  end

  def x
    @x
  end

  def y
    @y
  end
end
```
Since this is such a common thing in Ruby, the language has shortcuts to quickly define such simple methods that reflect an objects attributes:

- `attr_reader :var` - Creates a read-only method for attribute `@var`.
- `attr_writer :var` - Creates a write-only method for attribute `@var`.
- `attr_accessor :var` - Creates both kinds of methods to read and write to this attribute.

So, our `Point` can be described simply as:
```ruby
# A location in 2D space.
class Point
  attr_reader :x

  attr_reader :y

  def initialize(x, y)
    @x = x
    @y = y
  end
end
```
> In our case, we will only need to ever read these attributes, so I just used `attr_reader`. `attr_accessor` would have also worked here.

Playing with our new readers:
```ruby
point = Point.new(1.5, -3.0)
puts point.x #=> 1.5
puts point.y #=> -3.0
```

What else would be helpful to do with our point, or perhaps any other point? Well, with any two points, you can calculate the distance between them.

Ruby has a rich standard library, which includes some common mathematical functions. We need the pythagorean theorem here to calculate the distance between two points, and if we do some searching we can see Ruby already provides a method for us to calculate this instead of having to implement it ourselves:

[https://ruby-doc.org/core-2.4.0/Math.html#method-c-hypot](https://ruby-doc.org/core-2.4.0/Math.html#method-c-hypot)
```ruby
Math.hypot(3, 4) #=> 5.0
```

Let's implement it to our `Point`. (Note: I've omitted the rest of the class we already wrote to save space, ad nauseum)
```ruby
# A location in 2D space.
class Point
  # Calculates the distance to another Point object
  def distance(other)
    x_difference = x - other.x
    y_difference = y - other.y

    Math.hypot x_difference, y_difference
  end
end
```
> Here, the `x` in `x_difference = x - other.x` is actually calling this objects *own* `attr_reader` method internally that fetches its `@x` attribute. In another language, you may write something like `self.x` to refer to this value. You can do that here too in Ruby, but in most cases you can omit `self.`, because Ruby understands what you mean.

Our new `#distance` method will take another `Point` object as an argument, read its `@x` and `@y` attributes, and do the maths to return our result implicitly by being the last line of the method.

Let's try it out:
```ruby
point_a = Point.new(1.5, -3.0)
point_b = Point.new(2, 1.0)

puts point_a.distance point_b #=> 4.031128874149275
```

**We can now:**

1. Describe a `Point`.
2. Measure the distance between any two `Point`s.

### Line

Let's refer back to our definition of a `Line`.

```ruby
# A finite segment (or distance) between two points.
class Line
end
```

From what we know, we can now give our `Line`s two attributes. We'll call them `start` and `stop` (I would use the word `end` here, but this is a Ruby keyword and it could get confusing.)

```ruby
# A finite segment (or distance) between two points.
class Line
  attr_reader :start

  attr_reader :stop

  def initialize(start, stop)
    @start = start
    @stop = stop
  end
end
```

Great. What other properties does a finite line have? Ah, right - length.

But - we've already implemented this! We already know the distance between any two `Point` objects.. let's use it:

```ruby
# A finite segment (or distance) between two points.
class Line
  def length
    start.distance stop
  end
end
```
I'll use the same two points from before and test it:
```ruby
point_a = Point.new(1.5, -3.0)
point_b = Point.new(2, 1.0)

line = Line.new(point_a, point_b)
puts line.length #=> 4.031128874149275
```
> When talking about Ruby code, what we've done here is "wrapped" the `#distance` behavior of a `Point` object - or rather, we "abstracted" it - to give us the length of any kind of line we could describe.

**Now we can:**

1. Describe a `Point`.
2. Measure the distance between any two `Point`s.
3. Create a `Line` from any two `Point`s.
4. Measure the `#length` of that `Line`.

Take note of how we described the problem in simplest terms, and are slowly building up *layers* of objects and methods in order to craft our solution.

This leaves one last piece to our puzzle.

### Polygon

We can now move on to describe a `Polygon` as a collection of `Line`s.

```ruby
# A collection of lines that describe a 2D shape.
class Polygon
  attr_reader :segments

  def initialize(segments = [])
    @segments = segments
  end
end
```
> Arguments for methods can be given a default value using the above syntax in `def initialize`. Here, I'm making `segments` default to an empty array.

We're going to design `Polygon` to accept an `Array` of `Line`.

Our new `Polygon` can be instanced like so..
```ruby
Polygon.new [Line.new .., Line.new .., Line.new ..]
```
Thinking about `Lines` abstractly, we can use an *enumerator* called `#reduce` to help us calculate the perimeter. Ruby standard library to the rescue again!

- `#map` will iterate through each element and perform a certain process that we define, and return a new collection with the results.
```ruby
array = [1, 2, 3, 4]
array.map { |e| e + 1 } #=> [2, 3, 4, 5]
```
> The expression `{ |e| a + 1 }` is called a *block*. The the variable in the pipes (`|e|`) represents the element of the array at the current iteration. You can call this variable whatever you like.

- `#reduce` will iterate through and take each element of the array, and perform some operation that describes a process to reduce a collection down to a single element. Here, we'll be using it to calculate the sum of a list of numbers (the lengths of the segments).
```ruby
# Calculate the sum of all elements in an array
array = [1, 2, 3, 4]
array.reduce { |a, e|  a + e } #=> 10
```
> In `#reduce`, the `a` in `|a, e|` represents an accumulator - an empty variable that will be returned once the enumeration is finished, and persists through each iteration of the enum. `e` represents the current element of the iteration.

You can [go here](https://docs.ruby-lang.org/en/2.4.0/Enumerable.html) for more examples and other iterators you can use. Learn them well! They're the bread and butter of any rubyist!

Back to `Polygon` - let's use `#reduce` to calculate the perimeter.

```ruby
# A collection of lines that describe a 2D shape.
class Polygon
  def perimeter
    segments.map { |e| e.length }.reduce { |a, e| a + e }
  end
end
```
> There is a shorter way to express this too. Since in both enums, we're only calling a single method, you can pass a symbol that represents a method to call on all elements of that array. This could be written as `segments.map(&:length).reduce(:+)`. Remember this handy shortcut for simple iterators - you can read more about it in the previously linked documentation for `Enumerable`.

Let's put this all together and see how all of our objects and concepts we've discussed link up.
```ruby
lines = [
  Line.new(Point.new(3.0, 1.0), Point.new(5.0, 1.25)),
  Line.new(Point.new(5.0, 1.25), Point.new(4.0, -1.25)),
  Line.new(Point.new(4.0, -1.25), Point.new(3.0, 1.0))
]

polygon = Polygon.new(lines)

puts polygon.perimeter #=> 7.170361291090916
```
We can now calculate the perimeter of a polygon with as many sides as we like!

## In Review

So, we've come to a solution. You may have very well come to something different - and that's okay if you see some other way to do this that I didn't! That is a wonderful thing about Ruby and most other languages - there's no single right answer, and there's a lot of room to be creative. Programming is as much a science as it is an art.

Some takeaways:

- We did the maths, but it's not very pretty. That's okay - it's often best to make things work *first* and then make them attractive and easy to use later. Can you think of some ways to describe Polygons in fewer terms?
- The Ruby standard library is very rich, and there's documentation everywhere. Don't be afraid to google something, regardless of how obscue you think it might be - there may already be a built-in answer at your fingertips.
- Play with your food. I learned the most from Ruby by playing with it, in projects and even just in the interpreter, `irb`. Do you have Ruby? Then you have `irb` - try executing `irb` at your command line. You can test Ruby expressions and such here, line by line, without having to make a whole test file. Don't be afraid of error messages! Read them through, they're often quite telling.
- Break problems down into their simplest components and attributes, and give them as much logic (methods) as you can on their own with its current level of data available to it (i.e., we didn't make `Point` able to calculate perimeter, because it doesn't know what a `Line` is yet - this doesn't make sense without additional layers of data!) .
- Good Ruby code will read almost like an English sentence, and reflect the problem that you're solving. We solved this problem of perimeter with Polygons, Points, and Lines - adding the `#length` of each `segment` into a total.

## Moving forward

There's tons of cool things out there that you can do with Ruby, and maybe even problems in your own life that you can use to cook up Ruby solutions for.

Check out [http://awesome-ruby.com/](http://awesome-ruby.com/) for *tons* of community created packages - see what you can make with them!

Learn to read documentation like those on [http://www.rubydoc.info/](http://awesome-ruby.com/). Then you'll be a real library ninja, and can answer a lot of your own questions! (Hopefully!)

When you're stuck, there's a lot of helpful ruby people out there. StackOverflow, IRC, etc. - or even me! I can be reached at wherever you're viewing this post, or at [my email](mailto:zachnowicki@gmail.com), or on [Discord](https://discordapp.com) - I'm `z64#2639`.

## Full code

```ruby
# A location in 2D space.
class Point
  attr_reader :x

  attr_reader :y

  def initialize(x, y)
    @x = x
    @y = y
  end

  # Calculates the distance to another Point object
  def distance(other)
    x_difference = x - other.x
    y_difference = y - other.y

    Math.hypot x_difference, y_difference
  end
end

# A finite segment (or distance) between two points.
class Line
  attr_reader :start

  attr_reader :stop

  def initialize(start, stop)
    @start = start
    @stop = stop
  end

  def length
    start.distance stop
  end
end

# A collection of lines that describe a 2D shape.
class Polygon
  attr_reader :segments

  def initialize(segments = [])
    @segments = segments
  end

  def perimeter
    segments.map(&:length).reduce(:+)
  end
end

lines = [
  Line.new(Point.new(3.0, 1.0), Point.new(5.0, 1.25)),
  Line.new(Point.new(5.0, 1.25), Point.new(4.0, -1.25)),
  Line.new(Point.new(4.0, -1.25), Point.new(3.0, 1.0))
]

polygon = Polygon.new(lines)

puts polygon.perimeter
```
